Good morning and welcome.
Thanks.
Welcome to Asynchronous
Design Patterns with Blocks,
GCD, and XPC.
My name is Kevin Van Vechten and I'm
the manager of the GCD and XPC team.
And today we're going to start off
with a bit of an overview of blocks,
GCD, and XPC for those of you who might
not be familiar with the technology.
And then we're going to dive into
some detail about what's new with
Objective-C and ARC in GCD and XPC.
And then finish up the talk with a lot
of discussion about how to use these
technologies to implement asynchronous
design patterns in your code.
So first, let's get started with an
introduction to blocks.
The best way to think about
blocks is by first thinking
about function pointers in C.
Blocks are really
anonymous functions in C.
So here we have a type declaration
of a callback function.
It takes a string as an argument.
It doesn't return any value.
And we can turn this into a block type
simply by changing the star to a caret.
And the caret is a special
character the compiler recognizes to
indicate that this is a block type.
But otherwise,
it looks the same as a function pointer.
So we can use these blocks in
a much different way than we
typically use function pointers,
and we can actually
declare a block variable.
So we have our type, callback block.
The variable name is b.
And then instead of just giving it
the address of a function to call,
we can actually give it the body of the
function right there in line in our code.
We declare the arguments,
which in this case is a string,
and then the body of code
prints that string out.
Calling the block is really the same
as invoking a function pointer in C.
All you need to do is reference
the block variable by name
and pass it the arguments.
So in this example,
if we were to compile and run this code,
it would just print "Hello, world."
So declaring the body of code in
place right where you need it is
really the key benefit of blocks.
With function pointers,
you need to define a function that's
a helper somewhere else in your code.
You need to make changes
there and wherever you use it,
you know, if you need to renegotiate how
you pass data to that code.
But with blocks,
since you declare them directly in line,
they actually can make reference to
variables in the enclosing scope.
So if you have a big function and
then you declare a block in it,
any variables outside of the
block in the function are
actually visible to the block.
And we'll go into detail in a
moment to see how that works.
And even further than just
referring to these variables,
you can actually modify
variables in the enclosing scope,
which is also very powerful.
So let's take a look at these three
benefits of blocks in the context of
three very common types of blocks:
completion, comparison, and enumeration.
So completion is something you probably
are all familiar with to some extent.
There's typically a pattern where
you tell the system to perform
some activity on your behalf,
and then it calls a function that
you provide when it's done and
passes the result of that operation.
So we might have a
completion callback function,
and we can turn that into a block.
And then let's say we've defined a
routine ourselves or maybe we're making
use of an API call that looks like
this where it downloads some resource
asynchronously from the network.
All we have to do is provide it a
URL and then we provide it a completion
block that gets called when the resource
has been downloaded and that passes
us back the data that was downloaded.
Well, we can combine these two together
and write a very simple routine that,
say, updates an image in one of
our views based on the data
downloaded from that URL.
So you can see we're just
downloading data from the URL.
When that operation is complete,
we've provided a completion block.
We get past the data.
We can turn that data into an NSImage.
We can update our view,
and then we're done.
So the key here is we're
declaring it in place.
We don't have to define an external
function and refer to that.
Our next example is comparison.
You've probably all written a
comparison function at some point.
To look at two values,
decide which one is greater
or less than the other value,
and maybe you would use this
in some sort of sort operation.
So we're taking two arguments,
returning a comparison result.
We'll turn that into a block.
And we'll assume that there's some
sort API on the system or some
function that we've defined that
sorts the contents of a mutable array.
In this example,
we're going to have a mutable
array of string objects,
and then we're going to
sort them in some way.
Well, we can very easily define a helper
routine that sorts all the strings
in this array alphabetically.
And all it needs to do is call
the compare method on one of the
strings to compare it against the
other string and return the results.
And then at the end of the call,
all the elements in the
array will be sorted.
But we can expand this a little bit and
really make use of blocks by referring
to a variable in the enclosing scope.
Let's say we want a more
generic sort operation.
We want to be able to sometimes
sort case-sensitively and other
times sort case-insensitively.
Well, we can take an argument to our
helper routine and turn that
into the right option flags for
the compare method of NSString.
And we can do that in
the calling function.
And at the time the comparison block
is passed into the sort routine,
It has reference to whatever
option flags we specified.
So we've really taken our completion
callback and made it very generic,
very simply.
If we were to try to do
this with function pointers,
we would probably have to define
some sort of context structure
and get the data into the context
structure and pass it along,
and then, you know,
do a bunch of casting and make
sure everything's all in sync.
But with blocks,
we can just refer to the variable
exactly where we need it.
And finally,
let's look at the example of iteration.
Pretty common pattern.
You know, perhaps you have a lot of data.
In this case,
we'll talk about numbers in a set.
And we just want to enumerate every item
in the set and apply some function to it.
We can turn our Applier
function into a block.
And we can assume that there's an API on
the system or something that we've
written that does the iteration of
all the values in the set and applies
our function to each of those values.
And so we'll use these two
concepts to implement something
that's pretty powerful.
We will have a helper routine
that returns the maximum
value that we see in the set.
And we can do this very easily by making
use of the fact that blocks can modify
the variables in the enclosing scope.
Now, you'll notice in this example our
result variable has this "under
under block" keyword attached to it.
By default, all the variables that are
referenced by blocks are constant
read-only copies of the variable.
And that's done for performance reasons.
The compiler has to do a little
bit extra work if you want to
make the variable modifiable.
So we don't do it by default.
But when you apply this
keyword to the variable,
you're telling the compiler
that you do wish this variable
to be modifiable by the block.
The compiler does the extra work
that's needed to make that possible.
And so here we have a result
variable that can be modified by our
callback block or our applier block.
And we'll start off with
the best guess value.
You know, let's say it's the smallest
number we can possibly represent.
So whatever maximum we find is
probably going to be bigger than that.
And we apply our block to all
of the numbers in the set.
The supplier function calls
our block once for each number.
Within the block,
we can look and we can see is
this new number we're looking at
greater than the previous best
guess that we have for the maximum.
If it is,
we can just update that variable.
It modifies it in the enclosing scope.
And then when the apply function is done,
we're left with the most recently
updated version of the result variable,
which now contains our maximum value,
and we can simply return that.
So now I'd like to
move to talk about GCD.
GCD takes blocks and it treats them
like data objects and lets you do
very powerful things with them.
So,
GCD is short for Grand Central Dispatch.
And what it fundamentally lets you
do is take blocks and enqueue them
on queues for later asynchronous
invocation by the system.
And we provide a thread-safe
enqueue operation,
so you can have any number of
threads in your application and
they can all be operating on
the same queue simultaneously.
You don't need to do
any additional locking.
And once the blocks have been enqueued,
the system is then responsible
for asynchronously dequeuing
the blocks from those queues and
invoking them on your behalf.
So before we get started talking
about the invocation aspect,
I want to clarify the particular
type of block that GCD uses.
We refer to them as dispatch blocks,
and they're a special case in that all
of the blocks that GCD uses take no
arguments and have no return value.
And the reason we do this is because we
can treat every block of code completely
identically if we know that the signature
has no arguments and no return value.
And we can rely exclusively on capturing
variables in the enclosing scope as
the way to get data into your block.
And it turns out that this
is a very elegant approach.
And in fact,
these specialized blocks that don't
have any return value and don't take
any arguments can actually be written
with the syntax that you see on screen.
You can just use the caret
and then an open brace,
and that begins your block declaration.
So we have dispatch blocks.
Now let's talk a little bit
about the dispatch queues.
Creating a dispatch queue is a
very straightforward operation.
We have a create routine.
It only takes two arguments.
The first argument is a
label that you provide.
It can be anything you want.
We recommend the reverse
DNS style naming scheme.
And we actually take these labels
that are applied to queues and
we print them out in things
like sample or crash reports.
So when you're analyzing your code,
you can match up what
activity is corresponding to
which queues you've defined.
And the second argument is
really the type of the queue.
And there are two main types of queues.
There's a serial queue,
which executes blocks that are
enqueued on it one at a time serially.
And there's a concurrent queue,
which can potentially execute
blocks in parallel at the same time.
So in this example, we're creating a very
simple serial queue,
the basic building block of GCD.
And once we've created the queue,
we're going to print out a
message that says we're before
this dispatch async call.
Now, Dispatch Async is a really
fundamental piece of GCD,
and what it's doing is it's enqueuing
a block for asynchronous execution.
So it takes two arguments,
the queue that we want to target and
the block that we want to enqueue.
And all this does is it puts the block
onto the queue and returns immediately.
It doesn't wait for the block to execute.
That'll be done later by the system.
And after we've called dispatch async,
we print out a little message
that says that we're after
this dispatch async call.
Now, what's really important to
note is when we run this,
the order is going to be a little bit
different than what you might expect.
We'll actually see before async,
after async, and then later the hello
world that was in the block.
And again, the reason for this is that
dispatch async simply enqueues
the block and returns immediately.
It doesn't run it yet.
So in our code,
we've printed out before async,
we've enqueued it,
we've printed out after async,
and then at some later point,
the system pairs up that
queue with a worker thread,
dequeues the block from the queue,
invokes it, and that's when we see
hello world printed out.
So these dispatch queues,
I talked a little bit
about the serial queue,
have some interesting properties,
the first of which is that a
serial queue always processes
blocks in strictly FIFO order.
So if you submit multiple
blocks to the queue,
the first one that's enqueued is
going to be the first one that's run,
and that's a strong guarantee
that the system makes.
And that turns out to be very
useful in that if you have multiple
threads enqueuing onto a queue,
the FIFO serialization that's done helps
you synchronize your code and kind of
provide strong ordering guarantees.
The second interesting property
of these queues is that we have
an atomic enqueue algorithm.
So you're not going to have
threads that are waiting on a
lock to get their opportunity to
enqueue a block onto the queue.
And it's, you know,
some sort of highly contended resource.
It's actually a very efficient algorithm,
and you can have many,
many threads enqueuing onto a queue,
and they're all going to
atomically get their block
enqueued and return immediately.
It's a weight-free algorithm.
And then, of course,
as I've already mentioned,
the automatic dequeue is the third very
interesting property of these queues.
The system is responsible for creating
worker threads to process the queues,
and it then takes...
takes these threads and dequeues the
blocks and invokes them on your behalf.
We'll talk a little bit more about
why that's so important in a moment.
So here's a little animation of
the automatic dequeue process.
In this example, we have two queues.
They're both serial queues.
One of them has two blocks.
The other has three blocks.
And we're going to start
running the simulation,
and you'll see that the system is going
to take the first block enqueued to
one of the queues and start running it.
And when that's finished,
it'll move on to the next
and move on to the next.
Now, what's interesting is if
another thread becomes available
to process additional work,
we'll then pick up the next queue and
start running blocks on that queue.
And so even though we've satisfied
that strong FIFO ordering guarantee
for each individual queue,
you can see there's also the
opportunity for two queues to be
processed concurrently in parallel.
So why are asynchronous
blocks so important?
Well, the key to asynchronous blocks is
that they allow you to easily wrap
certain pieces of code for execution
asynchronous to your main thread.
And this is really important
because the main thread in your
application is what's responsible
for running the main event loop.
And the main event loop is what's
receiving and responding to touch events
or keyboard events or things like that.
It's what keeps your application
responsive to user input.
And so if you do some really
long-term work on this,
you'll see that the main
thread is responsible for
running the main event loop.
And the main event loop is what's
receiving and responding to touch events
or keyboard events or things like that.
It's what keeps your application
responsive to user input.
And so if you do some really
long-term work on this,
you'll see that the main
thread is responsible for
running the main event loop.
And so if you do some really long
running operation on the main thread,
let's say you're just waiting for
some file to download from the
network or something like that,
all the time that's spent in
that operation if it's being done
synchronously is time that is not being
spent receiving events from the user.
And so ultimately it makes
the app appear unresponsive.
On OS X you see the spinning cursor to
indicate that an app is unresponsive.
On iOS it just doesn't
respond to touch events.
And of course if you do this
long enough on iOS at some point
the app is terminated and you
return back to the home screen.
So it's really important to keep the main
thread responsive to all these UI events.
And asynchronous blocks
are a great way to do this.
Now, if you're going to take a bunch
of work and get it off of the main
thread to run in the background,
you also at some point need to take the
results of that work and get it back
to the main thread to be able to update
your UI and communicate with the user.
And we can do this very easily
with something that we call
the call callback pattern.
So let's go back to our previous
example of updating an image view
with some resource that we've
downloaded from the network.
And depending on what our view is doing,
you know,
you may have read in documentation
or experienced in your own
debugging that really UI elements
in interaction with the UI should
all happen from the main thread.
And this is both for, you know,
real low-level thread safety type issues
and also you want things happening on
the main thread just so it's easy to
keep all of your view state in sync
with incoming events from the user.
So in our example before,
we had an asynchronous download
routine that as soon as it
downloaded something from the URL,
it called our completion block.
Perhaps we don't want to just set the
image of that view right here in the
completion block because we're not really
sure if the completion block is going to
be called on that background operations
thread that was doing the download.
So we can add a little bit of
code and implement the call
callback pattern to get that image
update back to the main thread.
And we're using our dispatch
async routine that enqueues a
block for asynchronous execution.
And we're using a second routine
called dispatch get main queue.
And this is a special routine that
always returns a reference to the
main queue of your application.
And the main queue is defined to
correspond to the main event loop and
the main thread of the application.
So it's a very convenient way to get
blocks to execute in that context.
And so the reason it's a call
callback pattern is the outer block
is the initial call that's happening.
And then inside of it,
we can repeat the same approach of a
dispatch async with a nested block.
And that's our callback.
It's also important to note
that this code is correct.
It's okay that the view object isn't
retained or released in this inner block.
Blocks actually automatically retain
and release all Objective-C objects
that they reference,
even when not compiled in arc mode.
So I'd like to extend on
this call-callback pattern
a bit and talk about XPC.
XPC is a technology
that's available on OS X,
and it gives you a very simple
interface to look up a service by name.
And once you've looked up a service,
you can send and receive
messages to it asynchronously.
And the important part about
these services is they're actually
separate processes outside of
your application's process.
So it's a completely
different address space,
a completely different
process managed by the kernel.
And we leverage all the blocks
and queues in GCD to deliver these
asynchronous messages simply as blocks
submitted to queues that you provide.
So it makes the asynchronous nature
of this communication very easy
to work with in your application.
[Transcript missing]
But you might have a little helper
that needs to do some network activity
or interface with certain hardware.
And so you can compartmentalize all
of that higher privilege code in its
own service and apply the principle
of least privilege to your design.
So let's look through the sample code
of working with an XPC service and how
it implements the call-callback pattern.
First, we create a dispatch queue and an
XPC connection to talk to our service,
and these two work as a pair.
We can look up our service by name.
In this example, it's com.example.render.
And we're going to build on our
previous example of decoding some
image data and assume that the data
we download from the URL might not be
in a format that NSImage can parse.
And so we're going to do some
transformation on that data
first in an XPC service and then
try to make an image from it.
Once we've created the connection,
we set an event handler on it.
The event handler gets called when
there's a reply from the service.
We'll do a superficial check to make
sure the reply isn't some type of error,
but it's real data that we're
getting back from our service.
Then we can extract data from the reply.
It's really just a dictionary,
property list style dictionary.
We'll get the data out,
and then we can call our
completion callback with the data.
And the completion callback we had
before is the one that actually
takes this new style of data
and turns it into an NS image.
Once we've fully configured our
connection by setting the event handler,
we need to call xpc_resume,
and that lets the system know
that we're ready to start
activity on this connection,
we're prepared to receive events from it.
And then interacting with the
service is really as simple as
creating an XPC message dictionary,
adding some data to a
key in the dictionary,
Sending the message to the service,
and it's at this point when we
actually send the first message
that the system launches the
service if it's not already running,
but it's done completely transparently.
And then when we're done,
we can release the message.
So to go into more detail
about Objective-C and blocks,
I'd like to invite
Daniel Steffen onto the stage.
Good morning.
So let's dive right into
blocks and Objective-C.
We've already seen how you can declare
a block indirectly in your code in line.
When you actually do that,
what happens is that there
is an Objective-C block
object created on the stack.
Blocks start out on the
stack for performance,
for speed, but they are copied to
the heap in many cases.
For instance,
when you are scheduling them for
asynchronous execution with GCD,
because in that case,
they need to survive the
lifetime of the current scope.
So what happens to the variables that
are captured by a block when you do that?
As we've already mentioned,
scalers are const copied to the heap.
Objective-C objects are retained,
but any plain C pointer
is just copied as a value,
and its underlying storage
is not managed for you.
So let's see an example of
where this can trip this up.
Here we are implementing a block.
We have a method that will do some
asynchronous work on behalf of the
caller and call them back on a queue
that they provide by invoking a method
on the object that they give us.
And we implement that by doing a
dispatch async in our method to a
queue internal to our object and do
some asynchronous work and perform the
callback to the caller-supplied queue.
Now, this code looks just fine,
no obvious errors,
but it turns out that it crashes.
So let's see why that is.
So here we've represented the two areas
of memory important in this problem,
the stack and the heap.
And when we enter our method,
we start out with the two pointers to
the objects that the caller passes us
and their underlying storage on the heap.
Imagine that they start out
with reference count one.
Now we create this callback
block on the stack,
which captures the Objective-C object
and the block that will
execute asynchronously,
which in turn captures
the dispatch queue.
and the callback block.
When we do dispatch async of this block,
as part of that,
the block gets copied to the heap,
and because it captures
the callback block,
that block also gets copied to the heap.
Because that block in turn
captured the Objective-C object,
this now has its reference count
incremented because it's being
retained by the block's runtime.
But note that the dispatch queue
still has a reference count of one.
That is because the dispatch queue T-type
there is just a plain C pointer type.
And of course this is
where the problem occurs.
When our method returns and the caller
releases the references to these objects,
the storage for our dispatch
queue will get deallocated,
and now we have this dangling
reference and the block will
crash when it gets executed.
How do we solve this?
We have to manually manage the
lifetime of the queue object
that's passed into this method.
We need to add dispatch retain
and dispatch release calls.
We retain before we async the block
and release once we are done with
the queue object inside that block.
So now I'm very happy to announce that
we've improved on this situation in
iOS 6 and Mountain Lion because GCD and
XPC objects are now Objective-C objects.
Thanks.
So back in the same situation,
the incoming object,
QObject that's passed to us
is now an Objective-C object,
so the blocks runtime takes care
of managing the lifetime for
us and we can get rid of these
retain release calls again.
And everything works correctly.
So automatically being retained released
by blocks is one big benefit of these
objects now being Object-DC objects.
There's many others.
You can also use them directly
as add property retains now.
Previously you had to use add
property assign and manually
manage the property storage.
Now the Object-DC runtime
will do it for you.
You can also use these objects in
foundation collections directly,
so you can make an
NSRA of dispatch queues,
for instance.
The static analyzer understands
more about these objects,
and instruments in the debugger
support them better via their generic
support for Objective-C objects.
Of course,
another area where we've improved
the Object-DC language last year
with the introduction of ARC in iOS
5 and Line is reference counting.
And so here's a typical example of
a method where we have to create a
bunch of temporary objects to send
a message to an XPC connection,
and we have to be careful to release
all these objects manually at the end of
the method so as not to leak any code.
When you compile this code with ARC now,
there's no more need for these release
calls at the end of the method.
The compiler manages the storage
of these objects for you.
So when you migrate
GCD and XPC code to ARC,
you can see that the
compiler is able to store
You can just use the Convert
to Objective-C ARC menu item
in the Xcode refactor menu.
which will run the ARC Migrator and
remove these retained release calls
for you and do all the other work
of converting your code to ARC.
Note that it's even possible to do
this again when you've already migrated
your code to ARC in the past and
it will do the extra work required.
Or you can just remove
these calls yourselves,
of course,
and in fact you have to because
like calls to the retained
release Objective-C methods,
these now cause compiler
errors when you build with ARC.
What are the requirements
for this support?
Of course, you have to build with the
Objective-C or Objective-C++ compiler,
and you have to have a minimum
deployment target of iOS 6 or Mac OS X.8.
If you still need to support older
releases and supply an older,
lower deployment target,
you will be automatically
opted out of this support.
Or you can opt out manually if you
need to for some reason by passing
OS object use option C equals
zero in your preprocessor flags.
There's a couple of special
considerations when...
doing this conversion to Objective-C and
ARC of your GCD and XPC code.
These are many things that the automatic
migration doesn't handle for you,
but look at blocks and return cycles
and APIs that expose interior pointers.
Let's look at a general example
of how you can set up a retain
cycle in an object with a block.
Here we have declared a class
that has two properties,
an integer value property and one
of these dispatch block type block
properties that we've seen earlier.
And we've represented the storage
of that object on the heap with
an initial reference count,
retain count of one.
Now we declare a setup method that
assigns a block to our block property.
And as part of this assignment,
we'll have to copy this block
to the heap because obviously it
has to survive the lifetime of
the scope of the setup method.
And as shown here,
the block captures the value
instance variable of our object.
And because this is an integer,
we expect this to do a const
copy of that integer value.
But of course,
that's not actually what happens.
If you access an instance
variable in an Objective-C method,
the compiler transparently
indirects that by itself for you.
And what actually happens is
that the block now captures self.
And because self is
an Objective-C object,
the block increments the
reference count of self.
And now you have a retain cycle.
When you get rid of this object,
it will not disappear because it
retains itself via that property.
So how do we break such retained cycles?
We'll look at three ways via scoping,
programmatically,
and with compiler attributes.
So, same situation as before.
We've made the capture
a bit more explicit,
but we still have this retain cycle.
How can we break this with scoping?
We simply set up a local variable
where we put the value that we want
to use from the object into before
we set up the block and capture
that value instead rather than the
instance variable or the property,
and so we avoid the
capture of self completely.
Of course,
this behaves slightly differently
from before because the value,
the property is actually read out
much earlier when we set up the
block rather than when it runs.
Because this is a read-only integer here,
this presumably doesn't make
any difference in this code,
but this is not a solution that
may be generally applicable if
you have this type of issue.
So an alternative is to break
these cycles programmatically.
Here we are, same situation we have,
but we've changed the example slightly
to use a captured Objective-C object
property where we presumably
can't apply the previous idea.
So here we'll set up a manual
cancel method that simply
nils out the block property.
By doing that,
we release the previous value
that was stored in that property,
and so it releases its reference
that it had on itself and
thus breaks the retain cycle.
And this is in fact exactly
what we recommend that you do.
When you encounter retain cycles
in your use of GCD or XPC API,
that has block properties.
Here we have two such objects,
the dispatch source
and the XPC connection.
Most of these have event handlers that
are block properties of these objects,
and it's very common to use the
objects themselves in those blocks.
So in both of these cases,
we've set up retain cycles on these
objects and need to break them.
And you do that by calling the
dispatch source cancel or the
XPC connection cancel APIs.
These are previously existing APIs that
were optional because the final release
would do this cancellation for you.
If you have in fact one
of these retain cycles,
then you now have to call these methods.
And of course, if you convert to Arc,
the release calls at the
end here will get removed.
The third way is to use
compiler attributes.
If you build with ARC,
you can use the under_weak compiler
attribute to set up weak references.
And here we use this in our setup
method to have the block in our object,
rather than capturing self,
it captures a local
weak reference to self.
And because it's a weak reference,
the block capture doesn't cause an extra
retain count to be taken on the object,
and so we don't have this retain cycle.
But because weak references
are zeroing weak references,
inside the block once we run,
we now have to check, or maybe we...
We may want to check that the weak self
is actually still pointing to the object,
that the object is
still alive when we run.
And we do that by setting up a
strong reference inside the block
and checking that that succeeded
by checking for nil and then doing
our asynchronous work and maybe,
if not, doing something else.
for many more details on under
under weak and ARC in general,
please go to the adopting automatic
reference counting session later that
is being repeated later this morning.
Our next topic is interior
pointers and APIs that expose
interior pointers to objects,
to container objects.
[Transcript missing]
How do we solve this?
One option is to add the
Objective-C precise lifetime
attribute to the container
object that needs to stay alive.
And that tells the compiler that this
object should stick around for the
whole duration of the surrounding scope,
exactly the duration of that scope.
So what the compiler will do is insert
its release call at the end of the scope
right before the close curly brace.
And this makes it safe for
us to access the interior
pointer inside this method now.
So in our next section,
we'd like to go over some asynchronous
design patterns with you that are very
concrete steps that you can apply to
your code to make it more asynchronous
and some best practices to avoid some
common trouble spots along the way and
show you some ideas of patterns that
you can apply to your own APIs when you
design your apps or to Apple's APIs.
And as a guiding example
throughout this section,
we'll use an imaginary image of your
application that can display images
stored locally on your device or
retrieve them from other instances of
the app on the network and display them.
And step one in this set of design
patterns is the most important
thing to always remember when
you're writing code on iOS or
OS X is don't block the main thread.
We've discussed this already.
The main thread is what handles
the user interaction and the UI,
and because we want responsive
UI in our apps at all times,
that's really the only thing that
the main thread should be doing.
Anything that is CPU-intensive
or blocking should be running
elsewhere in your app.
And running elsewhere,
you implement that by running in
the background with GCD and blocks.
So here, in our image viewer application,
we are on the main thread.
We need to do a CPU-intensive
render operation for some males,
and we want to move that to the
background because this could affect
the interactivity of our application
if we ran this on the main thread.
So we pick a dispatch queue that
we want to run this code on.
Here, we just use the global default
priority dispatch queue.
We enclose this work in a block
and dispatch async it to our queue.
And in the call callback
pattern that we've seen earlier,
once we're done inside
this block with the work,
we need to update the UI,
so we enclose the updating of
the UI in a block and dispatch
async that back to the main queue.
So when you apply this
pattern into your code,
it's important to not block
too many background threads.
Here we have almost exactly
the same example as before,
except that we're now doing some
IO on the background thread with the
NSData DataWeek contents of URL API.
We're reading some file
in from the file system.
Now, one of these dispatch
asyncs is just fine.
This doesn't cause any problems.
That's in fact exactly
the right thing to do.
But imagine that we now enclose this
whole thing in a big for loop that
iterates over all the images that
we have stored in our application,
which could be many hundreds.
Now your app could run into a problem.
Let's see why.
So this is an illustration of the
single case where we async one of
these blocks and run it on our queue
and an automatic worker thread comes up
and now it's blocked in IO for a while
to bring the data in from storage.
Now the thing to realize is
when you block these automatic
worker threads in your apps,
after a certain amount of time,
the system will create additional threads
if there is still pending work to be
done so that the app can make progress.
But now if you block these additional
threads that come up with more IO,
this pattern will continue and you
will end up with more and more and
more threads that are all blocked.
And of course,
this can now lead you into trouble.
You could deadlock your whole application
by having too many worker threads blocked
like this and hit the limit of threads
that the system allows you to create.
Or all these threads could end up using
so much memory that your app gets killed,
on iOS anyway.
So what's the solution?
One option is to use dispatch IO,
an asynchronous IO API that we've
introduced last year in line and iOS 5
to do this asynchronous IO differently.
So here we have the same for loop
but instead of doing a dispatch
async of a blocking IO API,
we use the dispatch IO subsystem
to perform asynchronous IO.
Here we create an IO object from
one of these zero paths and we
can submit an asynchronous IO read
operation and ask it to call us back
on the main queue with the results.
And this will now take care to,
even if you submit
hundreds of these requests,
to all do them,
perform them in a way that
doesn't overwhelm the system.
And for many more details on Dispatch.io,
please see the Mastering
Grand Central Dispatch session from
last year's conference on iTunes.
Our next step is how to
integrate with the main run loop
when you're writing GCD code.
You've already seen the Dispatch
Get Main Queue API quite a bit.
This, in fact,
returns a serial queue to you that
cooperates with the main run loop.
Every time the main thread
goes through its event loop,
it will look at the serial queue
and perform any blocks that
are present on it at that time.
So you can be sure that any block that
you async to this queue will run in the
context of the main thread's event loop.
But of course, we also have many run-loop
based APIs on our system.
And APIs that have
run-loop based callbacks.
Here I'm thinking of things like NSTimer,
any of the perform-mit-selector APIs,
anything that has an
asynchronous delegate call.
All of these APIs schedule a callback on
either a specifically selected run-loop
or the current thread's run-loop.
And it is important to be aware
of which thread that run-loop
belongs to when you use these APIs.
In particular,
typically you shouldn't call these
on the automatic worker threads
that GCD provides if they're going
to schedule a run-loop callback
on the current thread's run-loop.
This is because you don't have control
over the lifetime of these automatic
worker threads and their run-loops
are typically not running anyway.
So the usual solution is to call
such APIs on the main thread,
but then when you get
a callback from them,
be aware that you are now
still on the main thread.
So don't block there if you have to
do any blocking or CPU intensive work,
apply step number two there.
So let's look at an example of this
in our image viewer application.
We'd like to download some pictures
from a remote instance of our app.
We have saved the name,
the Bonjour name of that previously.
And here we use the NSNetService
API to resolve that name to an
address that we can connect to.
And this API schedules a run loop
callback on the current thread's run loop
and calls the NetServiceDidResolveAddress
delegate method when it's done.
So if you do this on the main thread,
this works perfectly fine.
But because this is a network
operation that could potentially block,
we want to do the right thing and
dispatch async this into the background.
And now we have a problem.
The run loop method,
the run loop callback
doesn't get called anymore.
And let's see why this is.
Here we start out on the main thread
with its main run loop running.
We async this block to
a background thread,
to a queue,
and we run on an automatic worker thread,
and it now schedules its run
loop callback on that automatic
worker thread's run loop.
This run loop isn't running, and worse,
when the block finishes,
that thread will probably
get recycled by the system,
and your callback along with
the run loop disappears,
and then it gets called.
So the solution here is to continue
calling such API on the main thread.
It's already asynchronous.
It doesn't block your thread,
your main thread, so this is safe.
But then inside its run loop callback,
that's where you should be careful
to not block and dispatch async
into the background if necessary.
The next pattern we'd like to look
at is using one queue per subsystem.
This is an idea to subdivide your
app into independently operating
subsystems that are controlled with
serial dispatch queues and interchange
messages with dispatch async.
And in this architecture,
you can think of the main queue as simply
the access queue for the UI subsystem.
So here we've represented our app,
architected in this fashion
graphically with the UI subsystem
in the top left corner,
a networking subsystem,
an image processing subsystem,
and the storage subsystem,
all of which can operate independently.
And now they can exchange messages
by dispatch asyncing blocks between
themselves and queuing them on
their controlling serial queues.
And typically,
using this architecture gives
you a very good granularity of
asynchrony in your application.
So let's look at a very simple example
of how we would do this in code.
We're back in our net service,
the resolve address,
run loop callback on the main thread.
Now we want to do some
network operations,
so we go to our networking subsystem
with a dispatch async to its computer.
And we go to our storage subsystem
to store that data by dispatch
asyncing to its controlling queue,
the store queue.
Once you have that,
we go to the rendering subsystem by
dispatch asyncing to the render queue.
And once we have finished
our rendering operation,
we go back to the UI subsystem
by dispatch asyncing to
its controlling queue,
the main queue.
Of course, this is a very simplified
example in your code.
These asyncs probably wouldn't
all be inside the same method,
but the same idea applies.
And when you're implementing
this kind of architecture,
you may have subsystems that
have reader/writer access,
that support reader/writer access.
And you can improve performance of these
by using a concurrent subsystem queue.
This is a type of queue that
we've introduced last year in
iOS 5 and Line that support
multiple concurrent operations.
And you create these with the
same dispatch queue create
call but pass in dispatch queue
concurrent as the second parameter.
And once you have one of these queues,
you can implement multiple
synchronous read operations by doing
a dispatch sync onto that queue.
Multiple of these dispatch syncs
can occur at the same time without
interfering with each other,
so you can have multiple
concurrent readers.
If you have to do a write operation,
you will use the dispatch
barrier async call.
This will ensure that
because it's a barrier,
it is the only call,
the only block that's accessing the
subsystem during a write operation.
Let's look at a very
simple example of-- oh,
before that,
we went into much more detail
on this in the Mastering
Grand Central Dispatch session last year.
Let's look at the quick
example of this in code.
Here in our storage subsystem,
we create its controlling queue
with a DispatchQueueCreate call by
passing in the DispatchQueueConcant
flag that I just mentioned,
and now implement a read operation to
the subsystem with DispatchBarrierAsync.
Once we are inside this block,
we are sure that we are the only
ones on that queue at that time,
so we can safely mutate
our storage at that point.
But now in our rendering subsystem,
we need some image data
to render the thumbnail.
This is where we would do a read
operation from the storage subsystem,
so we use a dispatch sync
call to our store queue.
And multiple of these could now occur
in the application at the same time
and operate very cheaply by just
doing a direct check for any presence
of barrier operations on the queue,
and if not,
doing this block inline directly.
And we extract some data from that
block with the under_under block
syntax that we've seen earlier.
Our next topic is the importance
of separating control and
data flow in your application.
Dispatch queues are great to
organize control flow in your app,
but they weren't really designed as a
general purpose data storage mechanism.
[Transcript missing]
The next topic is how to update
state asynchronously very
efficiently by using dispatch queues.
Imagine in our app we have a progress
bar that keeps track of how many
thumbnails have already been rendered.
And we want to very,
very cheaply update the state of this
progress bar from anywhere in our app.
We will use a dispatch source for this.
Here we're creating it with the
dispatch source type data add.
and we ask for the callbacks from this
queue to be called on the main queue.
Now we're setting up an event handler
for this source that simply gets the
pending data from the source object
and updates our progress view with
the progress that has been made since
the last time our block was called.
And once we've resumed this source,
we can, from anywhere in our app now,
update the progress by calling the
dispatch source Merge Data API.
This will very cheaply just do
an atomic add operation to merge
in the state and trigger the
execution of the event handler.
Importantly, though,
the dispatch source infrastructure
takes care to coalesce potentially
many of these update events into one
single invocation of the handler.
So this is something you can use
this to make sure that you're not
overwhelming the main queue with many
requests to update the progress bar.
It will only execute as many times as the
main queue can actually handle and maybe
update the progress bar for a larger
amount of progress for every invocation.
Another advantage is that you
can cancel dispatch sources.
So if the user has completely switched
to a different part of your app where
that progress bar isn't even visible,
you can just cancel this source
and prevent any invocations of this
event handler to occur in the future,
even if there have been some
updates in the meantime with the
dispatch source Merge Data call.
Our last topic is moving
code out of process with XPC.
We've already seen how you can use XPC to
apply the principles of fault isolation
and privilege separation to your code.
And one way to think of this is to
improve the user experience of your app
by not just not block the main thread,
but don't crash the main thread.
So moving code that may have to operate
on untrusted data or that is known
to be prone to crashes or security
issues out of process is a good way to
improve the user experience of your app.
And in this infrastructure that we've
described of one queue per subsystem,
you can simply think of
XPC connections as a remote queue.
And for many more details on the XPC,
we've introduced an awesome new
API in Mountain Lion in Cocoa for
XPC that was covered yesterday.
You should definitely go and see it.
If you've missed it,
go and see that session on
iTunes once it becomes available,
along with last year's
Introducing XPC session.
So here we've represented the same
architecture of our app as before,
except we've decided we should really
put the image rendering subsystem
of our app into a different process.
It's operating on network data,
image data that comes
in from the network,
and we can't be sure that
that won't cause us to crash
or to have a security issue.
And except for doing that,
for moving that code
into a separate process,
our app architecture is exactly the same.
We still send messages back and
forth between the subsystems,
except that some of these
messages now travel over XPC.
But if you've already applied the
one-cube-a-subsystem idea and subdivided
your app into different areas,
it is actually very,
very easy to apply XPC to this and
extract some of these subsystems
into their own processes that may
have different privileges or may need
to not cause the main app to crash.
So in summary, let's review the design
patterns that we've seen.
Number one, most important to remember,
don't block the main thread.
You do that by running code in the
background with GCD and blocks.
And while doing that,
make sure that you don't block
too many background threads
with blocking IO operations
or other blocking operations.
We've seen how to integrate with the
main run loop when you write GCD code.
How to apply the one queue per subsystem
pattern and read a writer access
pattern when you have subsystems
in your app that support reader access.
How to separate control and data flow
and the importance of doing that.
And how to update data synchronously
with dispatch sources very efficiently.
And finally, how to move operations
out of process with XPC.
For more information,
we have some excellent
documentation on the developer site.
The Concurrency Programming Guide covers
GCD and related technologies.
The Daemons and Services Programming
Guide covers XPC.
And the Transitioning to
ARC Release Note goes into much
more detail about the blocks and
ARC topics that I've covered earlier.
If you have any questions,
please contact our evangelist,
Michael Turowicz,
or ask on the developer forums.
There is dedicated sections
for both GCD and XPC on those.
We've already gone over
the related sessions.
Don't forget to go to the
Adopting Automatic Reference
Counting repeat later.
And that is it.
Thanks a lot.